---
layout: post
title: Thoughts on Crowdfunding as a Platform
category: Misc
summary: My experiences with Kickstarter and Indiegogo projects.
---

Yesterday, I received an email update telling me that my [Sense](https://hello.is) was finally going to ship, first to its Kickstarter backers and then to preorders. Two weeks ago, my preorder of the very popular [Canary](http://canary.is) arrived. First, we'll go through an overview about what they were and why I backed them. 

The Sense is a nifty little sphere that tracks a user's sleep quality based on a number of factors (ambient light and noise, tossing and turning, heart rate mapping, etc.) that it gets from the environment and from a little tracker attached to the user's pillow. I backed it while the fundraising period was underway during the summer of 2014 because it was getting a lot of media coverage and seemed well designed. Also, I was hoping that it would help me get into the whole quantitative body movement/fad.

The Canary I pre-ordered after its funding period was over. It's notable for being one of the largest crowdsourced gadgets to date, gathering over $2 million and accruing backing from some prestigious venture capitalists. It acts as an all-in-one smart home security device, with a fisheye camera and an array of sensors that detect temperature, humidity, and a host of other things about its surroundings. Then, it learns over time and connects to the user's phone to notify them in case anything seems out of place. I bought two Canaries, one because I thought it would make a cool gift, and one because I wanted to try it out as an early adopter. 

Now that we're up to speed on what I spent my money on, I'd like to discuss the pros and cons of crowdfunding. The Canary was fully backed on [Indiegogo](http://indiegogo.com) on August 26rd, 2013, totalling $2 million from the crowd and then another $10 million from VCs. Its timeline stated that all of the necessary research and planning had been completed and that a prototype had been made. The manufacturers would be lined up in March 2014 and production would begin around June or July, with backers receiving their Canaries by August and retail beginning later in the year. The Sense was fully backed on Kickstarter around the same time a year later, raising $2.4 million from the crowd and with a projected ship date of November 2014.

Both these products and the majority of crowdfunded products never meet their projected deadlines though, as teams almost always run into unexpected problems managing operations and manufacturing pipelines, even if many of them have prior experience in the field. The Canary didn't arrive to backers until July of 2014, almost a full year behind its expected date. To the founders' credit, they kept backers up to date pretty frequently with blog updates and were reasonably transparent about what was causing the delays. My Sense arrived only slightly late, which was a nice positive surprise in the world of crowdfunding. Both products are now for sale in the retail world at marked up prices, so backers feel as if they retain their early bird advantage.

My Sense fulfills expectations; it's very pretty and well designed, with some shortcomings in the functionality and robustness of the mobile app, but it does what it was meant to do without many problems. In the same vein, the Canary's setup process was also very prone to bugs and required some patience to get up and running. Its mobile apps are beautifully designed, but sometimes things don't update as they should, which is to be expected in a complex system where communication between devices is sparse and disconnected. In all, my view on crowdfunding these "large scale retail products" is that it's more akin to being an early adopter for a small discount on retail price. Users are paying for the right to be alpha and beta testers and not necessarily for a device that has all the stability and testing associated with brand names.
